There we are Aunt May, I think we can start our interview now.
And the first thing I wanted to ask you about is to go over what you've told me other times
about the Welch people coming up to St. John River Valley and settling finally at Cardigan and up in York County.
Well, I contend you don't need to take that.
No, that's okay.
I contend you, my folks belong to, came from Cardigan in Wales.
And they came to St. John of course by boat.
When they got here, they went by boat as far as Sheffield.
When they got out as far as Sheffield, they disembarked, but the boat didn't go any farther, I don't know.
They started to walk to Fredericton, and it was late in the fall, and the only one who could talk to him was the school teacher.
Yes, the other spoke only Welsh.
Only Welsh, and so when the folks from Fredericton heard they were on their way,
some of them came down to meet them to see what their plans were, and all they could say to them was teacher, school teacher.
So he went, he hunted the school teacher up, and the school teacher told them that they were headed for Cardigan in York County.
Now Cardigan was nothing but woods and rocks.
I wonder if they knew that when they came out.
No, they had, if they did, there must be a lot of rocks in Wales, because they picked out the rockies far by the country.
It could be they were deceived, you know, like the Danish people who went up to New Denmark.
Oh yes, I would be in surprise, yes.
No one told them it was all virgin forest, and they'd have to clear up there.
Well anyway, it was so late in the fall, and there wasn't a house for them up there, that the Fredericton people wouldn't let them go at all.
They would let them even think of going up there at that time of the year.
So they took them in, some of them took them into their homes, some of them, and the men folks got work.
There was a man by the name of Saunders who started a little store, and that store, Saunders' ran for years and years.
When I was a young girl, they were still there.
And some of them moved on up and eventually to Cardigan.
Well the men folks went up in the spring, and the women still stayed in Fredericton.
The men went up and they cut down trees, and they started and built a few log houses, and the women folks went up.
And they cleared a few bits of land and put a little crop in, and strived it out, I'd say.
Because there was no roadway except a dog path through the woods, and there they were.
Do you have any idea roughly what year this was when they arrived?
No, I couldn't tell you the year, but I think you could find that out at the Orson Briggs Museum.
Now it was way back in the form of when my grandmother was there, I think she was born here.
There'd be land office records too of the Grants.
My father's name was Evans, John I think, John Evans.
And what our mother's name was I don't know.
Except that you said they didn't pronounce it that way.
No, they called it Evans. They don't call it Evans, they called it Levens.
And in my youth they always called it Evans.
And I was, let me sit down over here.
Yes, perhaps I will.
My cousins, Evans' cousins were called Evans.
But when I named my son Evan, well, I don't know why Evan he is.
So anyway, my grandfather, his wife's name was Susan.
And he cut out a piece of land, cleared a piece of land and put up a house.
And they used to go to church in their bare feet.
Until they came to a certain rock below the greenhouse.
Of course one of the first things they did was put up a meeting house.
And when they came to that rock they carried their shoes.
They put their shoes on there, went barefoot, saved the shoes.
And then they took them off and they went back to the rock and walked home with their bare feet.
What denomination would they have been?
Well, it was Methodist. Methodist as it was years ago.
There wasn't a Methodist church there because there still is a Methodist church there but they don't use it.
Methodists I guess were or became the predominant denomination in Wales, didn't they?
They used to have sing songs and use a tuning fork.
And I know my uncles by marriage learned how to sing from the tuning fork.
I'm sorry, maybe you said or did you say roughly how many colonists there were?
No, but I can name you some of the families.
Saunders and Richards and Evans. There were two different tribes of Evans.
There were the Redbens and the Blackbens. Mine were the Blackbens.
And there was, oh let me think, Williams and Thomases and Griffiths I think I had in there.
Yeah, Griffiths are two of the Mary Poppett sisters. Your next generation.
There are quite a few other Welsh names around the Fredericton area. Joneses and there are other Morgans too of country.
Yes, Joneses up in that section.
Yes, no doubt some of them are descended from the Cardigan people too.
Oh yes, no doubt at all.
Anyway these people lived and managed to live, they used to have to go to Fredericton on foot.
And carry their supplies back on their backs.
The women would take a basket of eggs and butter and walk 17 miles to Fredericton and cart home whatever they could get for their eggs and their butter.
They used to do the same with New Merrill and the East North.
Yeah.
And one woman walked clear to Fredericton and back and two miles from home she had to go into her neighbor's to have a new baby.
Two days later her husband came with an ox cart and took her home.
And one day when my grandfather was out, her great grandfather, was out in the woods, a tree fell on him and killed him.
And my grandmother said they were so poor that they sometimes had to pull up the potatoes they planted to eat.
They wouldn't have anything else they did, for they never had a chance to sprout.
They'd have to dig them up and eat them.
And then grandmother married a man by the name of Jenkins.
Well that's a Welsh name too.
Yes, but he wasn't worth a hoot.
Was he from the colony too?
He must have been up there.
We always called her Granny Jenkins.
I didn't know her, but father did.
And I was her special pet.
And she lived with my grandmother after Mr. Jenkins passed away in Stanley.
Yes, that's quite near Stanley, isn't it?
Yeah, about 10 or 12 miles out.
I couldn't even find it on the map.
I went out through the hill here not long ago and couldn't find it myself.
I think it's pretty well disappeared, hasn't it?
Well they changed the road and you wouldn't know it's the same country at all.
Because I know my aunt Ellen Griffiths lived there and I was there at different times.
Could I find that place? No sir.
So anyway, there's a few of them still. There was a Billy Ray that used to live there.
But I think he was an English boy that came from one of those immigrant kids, you know, and he married one.
Could be.
But there were several families of Griffiths up there.
Oh, do you have any idea what... well obviously they came from Cardigan's here in Wales, presumably, or they wouldn't have given that name to this place that they found it.
Yes, that's where they came from. And they named their little rocky country after Cardigan.
So there must be rocks in Cardigan in Wales.
Well, did you say that you thought there were still a few homes there? The place wasn't completely abandoned?
Oh no, some of them I know because I think some of Uncle David Evans's family there.
And Uncle David Evans belonged to the Red Evans's and he married Papa's aunt.
That's how he came to be, Uncle David.
And, oh, there was a lot of them out in Woodland and I do know some of their names but I've forgotten them.
See, they spread.
Yes, yes.
And Woodland, Evans and Sir Woodland, Welsh people as well.
Yes.
And, oh, it never was, it never got to be a very big place, you know.
No.
But they seemed to be contented there.
But the Baptist Church, while it's still there, or was last time I was there, has been, they haven't used it for a long while.
Dad's cousin had it all painted and re-shingled in the lake outside and fixed it up the best he could.
But I went in and opened my name in there one day.
People are visitors of visiting the book, you know.
I suppose it's been a few years since you were there.
Oh, yes, for a long time ago.
That's how I was married but it's a long time ago, just the same.
And the graveyard had all these old names.
You see, we were in there looking at some of the names of the people that were relatives of ours.
And that's how it came to be, into the Baptist Church, for some of our people were Baptist.
But after the Baptist Church died down, it was the Mennedists that took over, you see.
Everybody went to the Mennedists Church.
Was it your mother or your grandmother you were saying was still, your grandmother still spoke Welsh, didn't you say?
And your mother knew some words?
Grandmother only had, she had spoken Welsh when she was young.
She told me she had forgotten it all but one or two words.
And she just told me what they were and I don't know if I could say them right or not.
Weirs and gers, ends and ends.
I remember I tried to find those words in a Welsh dictionary but it could be they were dialect words or something.
I couldn't seem to find them, you know.
And then she had a name for a broom and I don't know what that was.
For what?
A broom.
She didn't keep up with Welsh after she got married because grandfather spoke English, you see.
And I thought like your old granny talked Welsh but grandmother didn't.
Well that's really interesting.
I'll tell you, you were saying that your aunt...
Elizabeth Wood, of course. She was on mother's side. She was a Welsh.
And she told you most of what you know about the Cardigan people?
She was very much interested in the history of the people around Frederty, you know.
And Uncle Wood was interested in the museum.
In fact I think he started to say the only thing that said she never could keep anything in the house,
she took everything in the museum, even the broom.
And who else did you mention who showed you the...
Grandmother showed me...
Oh yes, your grandmother.
Grandmother Sansom.
She showed me the place where they used to live, it was pretty well the road in,
but all grown up again.
The old place of course when grandmother Jenkins left it, well it just grew up in a bush.
Where nobody...
I don't know, yes. Grandmother had brothers, there was Caleb and John and Benjamin.
And that was another one known.
I know one of them went to the stage.
And I think Uncle Caleb lived down on the Royal Road.
I never saw him, they used to call that Calip.
And that was called Caleb, it was called Calip.
That would be more or less a Welsh pronunciation of it I think.
Oh yes, that was a Welsh pronunciation, he was Uncle Calip.
That's interesting.
Yeah, and I think Ben lived somewhere down around...
Possibly Nashville City or Gibson or something.
Somewhere down there I know he didn't live on the Royal Road so far as I know.
That's where my father's people came from, the Sansoms.
My grandfather Sansom was brought up on the Royal Road.
Of course he wasn't Welsh, he was English.
From English descent.
So there we are.
You know Canadian people are...
They're only Canadians, there's no Sansom for them.
You're English, you're Welsh, you're Dutch, you're anything else, you've got everything in you.
Irish and I've got Irish and I've got not so much Irish as Scottish Irish.
And the Welsh.
And there's Dutch, mother's words, there were Dutch in mother's family.
There were certain parts of the country where people didn't mix as much.
I have a friend who was born in Cape Breton Island and he says he's traced both sides of his family right back to the Highlands of Scotland.
Yes.
As far as he knows he's 100% Highlander.
You'd only find that in a more remote area like Cape Breton.
They flocked for themselves.
Did you know that a lot of them went down to New Zealand?
Yes they did.
And some of them went over and settled in the Codray Valley in western Newfoundland too.
Closer to home.
They had a ministry that led a whole lot of them, it's flocked, down to New Zealand.
Yes.
His name was McLean I think.
I don't remember his name but I remember reading about him.
I thought that was quite interesting.
Yes.
There Aunt May, just to continue in a different vein, I was wondering if you could tell us what you know about the Durex or relations or cousins here.
Some of them are still living in the St. John area I believe.
Yes.
There was Grandmother Hall was a Durex.
From down here and when she was about 12 or 13 she ran away from home.
She had 14 different excuses for doing it and I think most of them were from right down to that were just to hear miserable devils and some of that.
She just wanted to make trouble.
Is that so?
She said it was because there was some sort of an epidemic down here but she skinned up a river on the boat, the river boat, and got off at Gage Town.
And the family went to a family by the name of Coy and they kept her for quite a while and her father didn't know where on earth she was.
And he went to the captain of the boat and asked him if he'd seen anything of her.
Apparently she wants to hung around the boat some because they used to haul from the boat you know.
Anyway he said yes he took her up to Gage Town with him and she got off there.
So Grandfather, great Grandfather Durex went up to see if he could find her.
And the Coy's hit her.
And when he went away they sent her up to Bear Island.
To, I don't know what was the name of the place.
She lived up Bear Island and she grew up.
And she went by the name of Katherine, Katherine something else.
The name was Katherine Durex.
But she went by another name, Wilson I think.
And then she fell in with Grandfather Hall and when he went to marry her she told him the truth of the matter, who she was.
And so he insisted that they marry, she marry under a right name.
So it was William Hall and Katherine Durex that got married.
So she changed her religion at that point if not before.
Yeah she was Protestant for the rest of her life.
She was anything.
And anyway they bought a farm at Lower Capital.
And they lived there for a long time.
Well Grandfather was this kind.
All anyone else had to do was come to him with a hard luck tale.
And he'd give them the last cent he owned while their own family went neat.
And that was to make Grandmother just raise you.
She used to knit for sale and she'd wove and she worked outside and she thought what they earned they'd give to their own family.
They had five, five girls.
And one of them died in childhood and so she raised these four girls.
So finally Grandfather said well, Katie, I guess we can't get along together.
So we just did well if we separate.
Is that right?
So he left.
He says I'll leave you the farm and he says I'll go work in the mill.
So he worked in a mill run by a man by the name of Burton and somebody else.
By the way, Neil Burton was married to my cousin.
It was his father I think.
It was all the miller and grandfather.
And so Grandfather Hall lived and worked in the mill as long as he was able to work.
And Grandmother kept the farm.
Well she lived there by herself.
Well her girls grew up.
Grandma married Sam Howland as Frank's mother.
And then two of them came down here and they married back into Catholic religion.
There was Aunt Min, Allingham, and Aunt Alice Phillips.
They found her eventually up there.
Was it her father or a brother or something who eventually chased her down?
Her husband said one day, Casey said I think you should go down to see your people.
And the girls now are old enough to keep house and he says I want you to go down to see your people.
So Casey came down on the boat.
And she asked the boat captain if he knew.
I'm listening to Michael Durich.
Michael Durich.
Yes he says they meet the boat every time it goes down and haul produce to the stores.
He says they'll be there to meet the boat.
Well she said, would you point them out to me?
She says I'm their sister but I haven't seen them since I was 13 years old.
And they think I'm dead.
Well he says I'd do that.
Better than that I'll take an introduction.
So he took her over and he introduced her to the two men.
And they of course were astounded.
They knew she was dead.
Her father and mother were gone.
And there was an Aunt Mary who was an invalid.
And both Michael and Thomas were married.
So they took her to the house but they didn't take her to see Aunt Mary until they went in and broke the news.
Joyful news.
So she had a visit with them and then of course she had to go home again.
But every year after that she sent everything that she could, had to sell from the farm, she consigned it to her brothers.
And they sold it to the best advantage and sent her back whatever she wanted in the way of flour and sugar and what not.
And always added a little extra out of their own pockets.
They were very good to her.
She couldn't write.
She never went to school to learn to write.
And she used to have to get the postmasters to write her letters.
And her postmasters I knew afterwards, years afterwards.
And anyway.
She lived up there on the farm for a good many years.
And when her oldest girl, two older girls, well for one thing her brother lost his wife and he asked one of his girls to go down and keep house for him.
He had two small children.
And the other one came down to learn to be a tailoress.
And they both married down here.
As I say one was Aunt Nenalingham and one was Aunt Alice Phillips and their families.
I don't know if that means anything around here now or not.
But Aunt Alice is our southern day, the one from not long ago.
I think my father used to see a bit of them when he was a boy.
Yes he did.
He knew James Duritt and Josephine.
Now they were cousins of Grandmother Hollins.
They used to treat him and take him for rides in the streetcars I believe.
James was awful nice.
He was awful good to them.
I never knew Aunt Alice.
But I met one or two of her.
I knew Arthur and Lewis and one or two, Rose I think it was, one of her girls.
And I have seen one or two of them but not to really know them.
But anyway when Grandmother got ill the word was sent down to Grandmother Hollins, Frank's mother,
that her mother was ill and somebody should look after her.
And she wouldn't have the neighbors in.
Just by the side you know.
And so Grandmother went up and they brought her down to live with them.
She hadn't much use for Grandmother Hollins to tell you the truth.
But she came because she couldn't do anything else.
She couldn't sit there alone sick.
And she lived with them for all quite a number of years.
I don't know how long.
And I will admit she was not a very pleasant guest.
She didn't care what she said or who she said it to.
She made life miserable for Grandmother, shamed her face more than once.
I don't know how to tell you this on the tape or not.
But when her husband died, when he got so he couldn't look after himself,
he went to live with the other Protestant sister, Hetty, down in St. Mary's.
She took care of him until he died.
They never saw one another.
She old lady didn't go to see him and he didn't come to see her.
And when she heard, when he died, Grandmother of course put on black as was expected.
And she started to go to church one morning.
All dressed in her black, you know, the long veil and all this trim that she liked.
Of course Grandma was prim.
And Grandmother's two brothers were over across the road,
lying out on their lawn on a fine, bright, sunny morning.
Old Grandmother Holl, great-grandmother Holl,
put her head out the window and she calls,
Lodge, Lodge, yes Mrs. Holl, what is it?
Did you hear the news?
No, I don't think that I did.
The devil's dead, don't you see his angel in the morning?
She said that too.
Poor Grandma that couldn't speak, didn't like Lodge howling anyway,
and she brought him up to church.
And that's the sample, that's just one.
And Frank said it wasn't living, it was just enduring what she lived with him.
What did Catherine Durek look like?
I couldn't say, there was no picture of her.
I would judge from her daughter that she probably wasn't a bad looking woman.
Because Aunt Min wasn't.
I never saw an Alice, but Aunt Min was rather nice.
I remember that distinct, was a really nice looking old lady.
Well, not so old when I knew her, but middle-aged woman,
and she had kind of reddish hair, glinted red, you know,
it wasn't a bright red like yours is, the definite red,
but it had red lights in it, and she always had high colored rosy cheeks.
And a very attractive woman, I thought.
I wonder if the red hair comes from the...
Comes from both sides.
From both sides, does it?
You see, Grandfather Howland's mother was a graven,
and they scotch, and they were the red scotch.
There was ever so many redheads in the family.
I see.
And there was one of them were braw boys, and his mother was one of the gravenses.
And there was Tom Graham had...
Oh, he had three redheads.
There was redheads all the way through.
And Elijah's oldest girl was redheaded, Elijah Howland's.
Yes.
And of course, Grandfather had three of them redheaded,
and when the third one showed up, he says,
well, by criminy, that's the last.
Not many more redheads out there.
Which I thought was often funny.
And then after me getting five, I didn't get a redhead.
But it's come out again in the next generation.
It does.
Gene's got two redheaded children.
Yes.
And you're redheaded.
I like it, you know.
It seems to go together with black hair, doesn't it?
Often in our family, at least.
Either one extreme or the other, either black hair or red hair.
Look at mine.
Well, now, Evans got red hairs.
Red hairs, amongst his black hair.
So had Burns.
And so has Ele.
And Eleanor had four, she got gray.
Every one of them had red hairs, but they weren't redheaded.
You know what I mean?
Yes.
Just the odd red hair here and there in their hair.
You know, I was sick of the piece when Gene turned up to be a redhead.
And then when she had two redheaded children.
Of course, there's redheads in Laurie's side of the family, too.
Laurie himself was kind of that way.
It's nice to be different, I guess.
Oh, yes. Certainly.
Well, maybe that'll do for now.
I don't want to tire her out.
I remember your mother bringing you up.
Bringing Henry up to show Grandfather.
There now, Pa, she says.
There's my redheaded boy.
And he was as fair as anything else, not a sign of red.
Oh, dear God.
Old lady was down at all about 10 o'clock one morning.
She dressed him in adzebrick.
The fire was out.
When Grandma heard her coming, she'd get the big handful of shavings
and stuff them in the soul.
And before she got time to set them alight, they'd all be down.
She'd say, Dad, yes, she's waste all those shavings.
She'd grab both of them out of the stove, put them under the bench again.
And it was just a continual front.
Who was it? Was it the wine?
Oh, Rondannan Williams.
She would be Irvin Williams' mother.
She's the one who liked the wine.
She would be sister-in-law to Frank's grandmother, Howard, old Aunt Rosie.
She was in Graham.
And this Aunt Ann Graham was her sister-in-law.
And she was kind.
She came down, then up up.
But she did like her little nickel of wine and kept her weight.
And so she was helping herself to it.
Get this old devil out of here.
She'd pick it up on my fourth wine.
Right in front of me, old Aunt Ann.
I'd be sitting in the middle of the window.
I'm bending against you.
She was a cold-blooded old girl.
Frank said it wasn't living, it's all in Annie.
It was just existing, what you think.
What's in these ever more?
Said something about...
Of course, Emma was pretty bit younger.
But Frank, for me, was a very living woman.
I've always wanted to get this thing straightened out the door.
I never was clear on it.
You see, she was a...
What have you got on your arm?
Oh, that's his tie.
The end of his tie there.
Oh, I see.
Looks like you get tied on your arm.
Is the house still there where James and Joseph came?
It's on Main Street, isn't it?
It's been fixed up a lot.
It's been a few steps, I know.
Well, she's got to fix up a lot.
I don't know about it, but it was a job.
Yeah.
They've been dead for a long while.
Yes, and...